We go back to the character.
You're done with choosing
and thinking of what she wants,
and you've put her in the situation
she needs to deal with.
The important thing
you need to figure out
is the action
that the character will do
in order to move the story forward
and for her to reach the climax.
What will she do?
It's important to answer
this question because
this will set the action
of the whole play.
Is she like Hamlet who
contemplates for three hours
just to solidify the story
and to reach his end goal:
To kill his stepfather,
who is actually his uncle
who killed his real father?
Will the character devise
different strategies to keep us interested?
Will she get what she wants or not?
Will she fall down the cliff
or not just to get there?
This will determine
if the play or literary piece
is plot-oriented or character-oriented
because it’s a mixture of both.
Sometimes, our understanding
of the character becomes deeper
even though the story is short
because the traits
of the character just emerge.
Notice when characters
contemplate about the past,
significant things
usually happen in the past,
and that’s when you
get to know the character.
Because of the past
the story stops.
When Jaclyn Jose does a monologue,
the story will slowly stop.
Imagine a sinking rock,
going deeper and deeper.
The deeper it gets,
the deeper you know about the character.
But nothing happens
because the character is telling a story.
Everything is on pause first.
If there’s a rally or a revolution happening,
it won’t happen yet
and the police won’t come yet.
She needs to finish her story first.
So the main story will stop.
But there are some plays
that are filled with action
to the point where you’ll ask,
“Where is this going?”
“I don’t know her anymore.”
She’s always tripping,
getting caught, climbing, falling
to survive.
The course of the story is linear,
but the depth...
it’s not as profound
as when characters have monologues.
I’m going to give an example
on Marvel superheroes and DC.
The ones we see in movies.
The DC characters
that Christopher Nolan formed are deep,
which is why it’s boring
for people who want action.
The fighting has weight
because of the characters’ depth.
In Marvel, there’s humor,
but that’s the only thing
that carried their movies.
Of course, there are characters
who contemplate if they’re superheroes or not,
but it’s only said in one hit,
and then it goes back to the action.
So people are like that.
People in 4DX are kind of like that.
That’s the experience of the audience.
But if you look at the depth,
this is it.
Those with angst like this go deeper.
Now, what balance
can you put in a play?
For example, in "Indigo Child,"
if you’ll watch it later,
bigger parts were reserved for the past.
Revelation of the past.
And if you look at the present action,
it’s not that huge.
The effect is it pulls you in deep.
There’s a reason for that.
You can use both to your advantage
or to your disaster,
to your catastrophe.
How will you choose?
How will you mix it?
In Chekhov’s plays,
almost all the characters
keep looking back to the past
and to faraway places.
“I want to go to Moscow,
I want to go to Moscow,”
but the character’s just standing there.
To the point where you just
want to give him the fare to go.
It pulls you in deep.
Towards the end,
it’s either you’ll laugh at them
because you’re jerks
or you’ll understand their dilemma.
What is keeping them there?
- So if it’s a musical,
the song either brings you deeper
into the plot or it drags the whole…?
Exactly,
that’s why there’s such a thing
as musical dialogue.
Because it can reach to a point
that the character has made a decision,
that if we notice
which Filipino musicals don’t often do.
Most of the time,
the songs in Filipino musicals are,
♫♪ This is my dream ♪♫
♫♪ I want to be this,
that’s why everybody knows… ♪♫
The story stops there.
It goes deeper but the action stops.
Unlike Les Miserables,
♫♪ You are the one,
I’m not but you’re not… ♪♫
Bag! Fall, run!
There’s action.
The action moves forward
because they converse through songs.
Since you got jukebox musical,
then it’s full of songs.
There’s no dialogue.
So for the most part,
the tendency is to ask,
“What song will fit here?”
If you include that,
that’s an opportunity for introspection.
That could be
an advantage for some moments,
but it could also be a boring thing for others.
That’s why it’s called a showstopper
because you stop the show
for the spectacle
of the choreography and so on.
It could be like,
♫♪ There’s no business like show business! ♪♫
From “Annie Get Your Gun”
If you do it that way,
it will really stop,
and you’ll forget the story.
“Ah, it’s so pretty, he’s good at singing…
What’s the story again?”
“Oh right he’s there,
he’s chasing it again.”
That’s why it’s called showstoppers.
It’s what your character does on stage.
It’s how he or she spends her time.
This is where the skill of the writer comes in,
how she’ll make use
of the character and plot,
when she’ll stop
the main story to deepen things
in order to reveal the past
which is still related
to what they’re chasing
so that when they reach the climax,
we already got
carried away by the action
and we already got to know the characters.
because they already presented
the whole reason why she’s after that thing.
Because in the 1950s,
she has this backstory.
Because 10 years ago,
she loved someone.
So, that’s what gives
depth and direction.
If you dive into one thing for too long,
it may bore your audience
or it might reach the point
where the story’s no longer interesting.
You keep telling the story,
but you’re not doing anything
or it’s filled with a lot of action to a point
where I don’t understand why it’s happening
because I don’t remember anymore
or you never said it was connected to the past.
What the characters are doing
at any point in time in the play will set it—
they'll set the rhythm, the speed,
or if it’s action, the depth,
and our knowledge of the characters.
Of course, the most ideal thing
is when you don’t notice
the character’s personality
unfolding inside the action.
That’s where you get to know her more
and why she’s doing those things
Of course, it’s a bit difficult to do,
especially when it depends on the situation.
These two set the atmosphere,
what she says, what story she’s telling.
If what she’s going through
is full of drama and tragedy,
especially if the audience
is moved by the character,
they’ll cry with her, pity her.
But if all she knows is humor,
then we’ll laugh with her.
She’s also the one who sets
the mood and atmosphere.
And of course, I guess
the whole genre,
if it’s tragedy or comedy.
If you notice--
I’ll take a small example
from Greek drama.
Oedipus’ situation
where there’s a massive plague.
You already know the whole situation
has an element of
expectation of drama,
especially when he says ,
“Let’s learn about the past.”
So he’ll find out about his past.
Compared to "Lysistrata,"
a Greek play by Aristophanes
Its setting is during a war
which is potentially tragic,
but it’s actually humorous
because the women of that city
decided not to have sex
with their husbands
because their husbands
are too focused on the war.
Then all of a sudden,
what the characters choose,
what they’ll do will set the tone—
if it’s light or heavy.
"Lysistrata" is probably one of the first
sex comedies in the whole world.
The style emerges from what we see
based on the characters’ actions and their response.